Let us pontificate on the dual nature of "automation" and
"configuration management", something that is frequently (and to some
extent painfully so) conflated. I have through many years of poking at
stuff in production come to appreciate a pattern for automation that
comprises a "sense", "decide", "actuate" loop (sadly, "SDA" is not a
sexy acronym). It's basically very loosely mapped onto the OODA loop,
with some of the 'orient' sliding into "decide" and the rest into
"sense" (and all of 'observe' being "sense"). That 'act' and "actuate"
are isomorphic should be self-evident.

So, an automate loop is "check how things are, make a plan for how to
make them be as they should, execute that plan".

Whereas configuration is "this is a description of how the system
should be" (ideally, you know, in a description language). And
"configuration management" would then be 'configuration', plus the
framework around, you know, managing said configuration. Environment
definitions belong here. Version control belongs here. And code
review. Because configuration is "just code in a different language".

And, in a super-ideal world, your automation leverages your
automation. And by that, I mean that it can not only go "this system
is not as it should be" and make it so, but go "this system is not as
it should be, but it is the way it was three check-ins ago, so it is
still fully managed and I can bring it from there to here safely" or
"this system is not like any of the checked-in versions, therefore it
must have been modified by a human, I shall tell a human this and let
them make a decision".

This would, of course, divorce the actual actuation of "the
configuration" from "the CM system" (which, you know, still is the
case for all of the three mentioned above, it's just never really
discussed that way), but would require that the automation system is
aware of The Blessed Version Control System which is I gather pretty
much anathema. But buys you So Much in terms of continuous sensing and
actuation that it would probably be worth doing.

So, where was I? Ah, yes, with these definitions of "automation
system" and "configuration management", it's clear that Puppet and
Chef are both config management and automation tools. It's perhaps
less clear (at least to me) that Ansible is configuration management
at all, since it pretty much looks like "all automation" from the
examples that I have seen.

And while we're discussing code-review, I have a mini-rant for how (at
least) a GitLab merge shows you not "the head" but "the head as it was
when the branch was created" (which makes some sense, perhaps), and
that is the least safe possible way of showing differences when
merging system configuration changes.
